---
title: PHP packaging
sidebar_position: 6
---

# PHP packaging

Packaging PHP scripts into PHAR files is a practice that enables the bundling of
entire PHP applications into single, standalone files. The acronym PHAR stands
for PHP Archive, and it aims to do for PHP what JAR (Java Archive) does for
Java. These single files can encapsulate all the resources a PHP project might
need, including libraries, images, and even data files, making it exceedingly
straightforward to distribute and deploy them.

The PHAR format is particularly useful for PHP scripts and applications that are
intended for distribution or deployment outside of a typical web server
environment. For example, command-line tools, cron jobs, or daemonized PHP
applications can benefit from being packaged as PHAR files. The practice is
common in projects that offer CLI utilities or frameworks, as it simplifies the
installation process. Instead of having to deal with a number of scripts,
dependencies, and other files, the end-user can simply download a single PHAR
file and execute it.

Additionally, PHAR files can be executed directly by the PHP interpreter, which
makes them platform-independent to a large extent. You can also apply various
kinds of compression to reduce file size, making them easier to distribute.

One important point to note is that in order to run a PHAR file, you must have
PHP installed on your system. The PHAR file is essentially a packaged PHP
application, and it requires the PHP runtime for execution. This is similar to
how you'd need the Java runtime to execute a JAR file. So while the PHAR file
bundles all the application's PHP code and resources, the PHP interpreter is
still required to actually run the application. This is an important
consideration when distributing PHAR files, as your users will need to have PHP
installed to use them.

## Workflow

For building the PHAR file, a custom script `build`, specified in `composer.json`, is
executed. This script leverages [Box](https://github.com/box-project/box) to
compile the PHP code into a PHAR file.

The `composer build` command installs Box, validates its configuration, and
compiles the PHAR file. The configuration for Box is provided in the
[configuration file](https://github.com/AlexSkrypnyk/scaffold/blob/main/box.json),
specifying what to include in the archive, where to output it, and what
compression to use.

The `release-php` job of `Release` GitHub action is triggered on pushes to
the `main` branch and runs `composer build` command. It then passes the built
PHAR file to the `softprops/action-gh-release` action, which attaches the PHAR
file to the most recent release as a release asset.

An example of the release asset generated by this action can be found on the
[Releases](https://github.com/AlexSkrypnyk/scaffold/releases) page of this
repository under *Assets*.

## Box

The Box project is a tool for building and managing PHAR (PHP Archive) files.
PHAR files bundle together PHP code, making it easier to distribute and execute.
It's especially useful for command-line PHP scripts and applications that need
to be easily installed without dealing with Composer packages or PEAR
installations. Box offers a host of configurations to customize the building of
your PHAR files, allowing you to specify directories, files, compression
settings, and more.

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import MyComponentSource from '!!raw-loader!../../../../box.json';

<CodeBlock language="jsx">{MyComponentSource}</CodeBlock>

In the provided Box configuration, several settings are specified:

- **Output**: Defines where the compiled PHAR file will be stored. In this case,
  it's set to `.build/php-command.phar`. Whenever Box compiles the
  PHAR, this is where the file will be output.

- **Compression**: Specifies the compression algorithm to be used for the PHAR.
  The value `GZ` indicates Gzip compression. This reduces the PHAR file size,
  making it faster to download and distribute.

- **Finder**: A powerful feature that allows you to include or exclude specific
  files and directories in the PHAR. In your setup, the finder is set to include
  all files in the current directory (`"./"`), excluding
  the `tests` directories.

These settings can be tailored to fit the needs of your project. By
understanding and properly configuring these parameters, you can control exactly
how your PHP code is packaged, making it convenient to distribute and execute.

Read more about packaging using Box on the [Box page](https://box-project.github.io/box/).
