---
title: Release drafter
layout: default
parent: CI
nav_order: 5
---

#  Release Drafter

[Release Drafter](https://github.com/release-drafter/release-drafter) is a
GitHub Action that automates the generation of release notes. It creates a draft
release each time new code is pushed into your selected branch, updating the
release notes based on the pull requests that have been merged since the last
release. The tool aims to save time and effort by compiling a summary of
changes, contributors, and other key information, which can be immediately
published or further edited as needed.

This automated tool is highly configurable, allowing you to customize how your
release notes should look, which changes should be included, and much more, all
using a YAML configuration file stored in your repository.

## Workflow

The Release Drafter job runs as a GitHub action on each push to the `main`
branch. It drafts a new release based on the changes since the last release using
the release notes template provided in the `.github/release-drafter.yml` file.

A live example of the release notes generated by this action can be found on the
[Releases](https://github.com/AlexSkrypnyk/scaffold/releases) page of this
repository.

## Release notes

This template provides
a [`.github/release-drafter.yml`](https://github.com/AlexSkrypnyk/scaffold/blob/main/.github/release-drafter.yml)
file with some sensible defaults to get you started. The file contains templates
and configurations that Release Drafter uses to generate release notes.

{% include_file "../.github/release-drafter.yml" syntax="yaml" %}

---

### `name-template: '$RESOLVED_VERSION'`

- **What it does**: Specifies the template for the release name.
- **Variables**: `$RESOLVED_VERSION` is a placeholder for the next version
  number. It defaults to the next version provided by the `version-resolver`.
- **Example**: If the current latest version is `2.4.3` and the
  `version-resolver` returns `minor`, the next version would be `2.5.0`, and
  the draft release name would be set as `2.5.0`.

---

### `tag-template: '$RESOLVED_VERSION'`

- **What it does**: Specifies the template for the Git tag to associate with the
  release.
- **Variables**: `$RESOLVED_VERSION` is used here too.
- **Example**: Similar to `name-template`, if the next version is `2.5.0` and
  the `version-resolver` returns `minor`, the Git tag would also be `2.5.0`.

---

### `change-template: '- $TITLE @$AUTHOR (#$NUMBER)'`

- **What it does**: Formats each individual change (merged pull request) that
  will be listed in the release notes.
- **Variables**: `$TITLE` is the pull request title, `$AUTHOR` is the username
  of the person who created the pull request, and `$NUMBER` is the pull request
  number.
- **Example**: If a pull request titled `Fix bug` was merged by `Alice` and its
  number was `42`, the line in the release notes would
  be `- Fix bug @Alice (#42)`.

---

### `change-title-escapes: '\<*_&'`

- **What it does**: Escapes specific characters to prevent them from being
  parsed as Markdown or other formatting.
- **Characters**: `<`, `*`, `_`, and `&` will be escaped.
- **Example**: If a pull request title is `Fix <bug> & improvements`, it would
  be displayed as `Fix \<bug\> \& improvements` in the release notes.

---

### `version-resolver.default: minor`

- **What it does**: Provides the default value returned by the version resolver.
  This allows to pass a version value via an environment variable, if required,
  to override automatically resolved version. In this way, the same template
  can be used to generate release notes by the Release Drafter action itself and
  any external tools (e.g. external GitHub action that creates a new version and
  passes it to the release drafter).
- **Defaults**: `minor` sets the next resolved version to be a minor version.

---

### `template: |`

- **What it does**: Sets the overall structure and layout of the generated
  release notes.
- **Variables**: Various placeholders are used within this template to
  automatically populate data.

    - **`## What's new since $PREVIOUS_TAG`**: Sets a header for what has
      changed since the last release.
        - **Example**: If the previous tag was `2.4.3`, this would render
          as `## What's new since 2.4.3`.

    - **`$CHANGES`**: Inserts all changes formatted according
      to `change-template`.
        - **Example**: If two pull requests were merged, you might see:

          ```
          - Fix bug @Alice (#42)
          - Add feature @Bob (#43)
          ```

    - **`**Full Changelog**: https://github.com/$OWNER/$REPOSITORY/compare/$PREVIOUS_TAG...$NEXT_MINOR_VERSION`**:
      Creates a link to a page comparing the changes between the previous tag
      and the new version.
        - **Example**: The rendered URL might
          be `https://github.com/owner/repo/compare/2.4.3...2.5.0`.

    - **`$CONTRIBUTORS`**: Lists the contributors to this release.
        - **Example**: If Alice and Bob contributed, it would list:
          ```
          Contributors: @Alice, @Bob
          ```
